Chocolate bar ratings analysis
================

Contributors: Bailey Lei, George J. J. Wu

Date: November, 2018

Chocolate bar is one of the most popular treats around the world, but
not all chocolate bars are made the same. Some chocolate bars are made
with a high concentration of cocoa beans and are thus considered more
dark, while some chocolate bars are far less concentrated in terms of
cocoa and are thus considered more light.

This begs a question - are darker chocolate bars simply better? For
instance, in the eyes of the experts, are chocolate bars with 99% cocoa
concentration simply better than chocolate bars with only 70% cocoa
concentration?

This analysis would explore the relationship between chocolate darkness
(cocoa percentage) and chocolate expert ratings.

### Data set

We examined the expert ratings of 1,795 chocolate bars compiled by Brady
Brelinski, a Founding Member of the [Manhattan Chooclate
Society](http://flavorsofcacao.com/index.html). A detailed description
of the data set can be found on
[Kaggle](https://www.kaggle.com/rtatman/chocolate-bar-ratings). We were
particularly interested in two variables in the data - chocolate
darkness (cocoa percentage) and expert ratings.

We began our analysis by examining each variable individually.

### Chocolate darkness

First, we examined the chocolate darkness variable visually.

![](../results/darkness_dist.jpg)<!-- -->

*Figure 1.* Chocolate darkness distribution for 1,795 chocolate bars.
Chocolate darkness was measured by cocoa concentration percentage in a
chocolate bar. Measurements were compiled by the Manhattan Chocolate
Society.

We also examined chocolate darkness numerically.

*Table 1.* Descriptive statistics of chocolate darkness. Chocolate
darkness was measured by cocoa concentration percentage in a chocolate
bar. The minimum darkness, darkness at the 25% quantile, median
darkness, mean darkness, darkness at the 75% quantile, as well as the
maximum darkness of 1,795 chocolate bars were reported.

| minimum |  q1 | median |      mean |   q3 | maximum |
| ------: | --: | -----: | --------: | ---: | ------: |
|    0.42 | 0.7 |    0.7 | 0.7169833 | 0.75 |       1 |

Both visual and numerical examinations revealed that the vast majority
of chocolate bars in the data set had a cocoa concentration of about
70%. The most concentrated chocolate bars in the data set attained 100%
cocoa purity, whereas the least concentrated chocolate bars had a cocoa
percentage of only 42%. The distribution of chocolate darkness is
somewhat normal.

### Chocolate expert ratings

Next, we examined chocolate expert ratings visually.

![](../results/rating_dist.jpg)<!-- -->

*Figure 2.* Expert ratings distribution for 1,795 chocolate bars. Each
chocolate bar was rated by experts using a Likert scale system, with 1
being unpleasant, 2 being disappointing, 3 being satisfactory, 4 being
premium, and 5 being elite. Expert ratings were compiled by the
Manhattan Chocolate Society.

We also examined chocolate expert ratings numerically.

*Table 2.* Descriptive statistics of chocolate expert ratings. Ratings
were generated by chocolate experts using a Likert scale system. The
minimum rating, rating at the 25% quantile, median rating, mean rating,
rating at the 75% quantile, as well as the maximum rating of 1,795
chocolate bars were reported.

| minimum |    q1 | median |     mean |  q3 | maximum |
| ------: | ----: | -----: | -------: | --: | ------: |
|       1 | 2.875 |   3.25 | 3.185933 | 3.5 |       5 |

Each chocolate bar was rated by experts using a [Likert
scale](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Likert_scale). Some of the main
encodings were: 1 is unpleasant, 2 is disappointing, 3 is satisfactory
(3.75 is praiseworthy), 4 is premium, and 5 is elite. A more detailed
description of the rating system can be found on
[Kaggle](https://www.kaggle.com/rtatman/chocolate-bar-ratings/home).

Most chocolate bars in the data set were given a rating of around 3 to
3.5, with 1 being the lowest rating given, and 5 being the highest
rating given. The distribution of chocolate expert ratings seemed to be
slightly left-skewed.

### Chocolate darkness and expert ratings

Let’s explore the relationship between chocolate darkness and expert
ratings. Expert ratings is an ordinal variable with more than five
categories. For this reason, we would first treat expert ratings simply
as a continuous variable, followed by an analysis in which it would also
be treated as a categorical variable.

#### Expert ratings as a continuous variable

For this part of our analysis, we would explore the relationship between
chocolate darkness and expert ratings, under the assumption that their
relationship to be linear, and that expert ratings to be a continuous
variable.

![](../results/scatter_darkness_rating.jpg)<!-- -->

*Figure 3.* Relationship between chocolate darkness and expert ratings
for 1,795 chocolate bars. Grey section represents 95% confidence
intervals for the line of best fit (blue line), generated using linear
regression.

We also computed the [Pearson’s correlation
coefficient](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pearson_correlation_coefficient)
and its p-value between the two variables.

*Table 3.* Correlation between chocolate darkness and expert ratings for
1,795 chocolate bars. Note that `estimate` refers to the correlation
coefficient that was calculated using Pearson’s product-moment
correlation method. This coefficient was significantly different from 0
as determined by a t-test (t = -7.07589) with 1793 degrees of freedom at
95% level of
confidence.

|    estimate | statistic | p.value | parameter |    conf.low |   conf.high | method                               | alternative |
| ----------: | --------: | ------: | --------: | ----------: | ----------: | :----------------------------------- | :---------- |
| \-0.1648202 | \-7.07589 |       0 |      1793 | \-0.2094894 | \-0.1194644 | Pearson’s product-moment correlation | two.sided   |

There was a weak and negative correlation between the two variables (r =
-.1648, n = 1793, p \< 0.0001). Both `Figure 3.` and the results in
`Table 3.` seemed to be suggesting that chocolate darkness is weakly and
negatively associated with chocolate expert ratings. In other words, as
the cocoa percentage of chocolate bars increases, chocolate experts tend
to give somewhat lower ratings, although this tendency is very weak.

#### Expert ratings as a categorical variable

We would next treat chocolate expert ratings as a categorical variable.
To simplify comparisons, this analysis further categorized chocolate
bars that were less than or merely satisfactory (with 3 or lower
ratings) as `low quality` chocolate (n = 790), and chocolate bars that
were beyond satisfactory (with greater than 3 ratings) as `high quality`
chocolate (n = 1005). We chose 3.0 ratings as the splitting threshold in
the hope that both low and high quality groups contained very roughly
the same amount of chocolate bars.

We then compared the mean chocolate darkness (cocoa percentage) between
the two expert ratings or quality groups.

![](../results/mean_darkness_rating.jpg)<!-- -->

*Figure 4.* Mean chocolate darkness (cocoa percentage) for low quality
(n = 790) chocolate and high quality (n = 1005) chocolate. Chocolate
bars with 3 or lower ratings were considered as low quality, and
chocolate bars with greater than 3 ratings were considered as high
quality. Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals for each mean
estimate.

As suggested by `Figure 4.`, high quality chocolate bars seemed to have
lower cocoa concentration. Let’s formally test this observation by
conducting a [Welch’s
t-test](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Welch%27s_t-test). We chose to use
a Welch’s t-test because the two chocolate quality groups differed in
sample size, and we assumed that the variance of the two quality groups
to be different.

We would be testing the following null and alternative hypothesis:

H0: The mean chocolate darkness (cocoa percentage) of the high quality
chocolate is *no different* than that of the low quality chocolate.

HA: The mean chocolate darkness (cocoa percentage) of the high quality
chocolate is *different* than that of the low quality chocolate.

*Table 4.* Results of Welch’s two-sided t-test comparing low quality (n
= 790) and high quality (n = 1005) chocolates in terms of mean chocolate
darkness (cocoa percentage). Note that `statistic` refers to the t-test
statistic, and was associated with 1288 degrees of
freedom.

|  statistic |  p.value | parameter |    conf.low |   conf.high | method                  | alternative |
| ---------: | -------: | --------: | ----------: | ----------: | :---------------------- | :---------- |
| \-4.075533 | 4.87e-05 |  1288.021 | \-0.0189668 | \-0.0066405 | Welch Two Sample t-test | two.sided   |

As indicated by `Table 4.`, there was enough evidence to reject the null
hypothesis. There was a statistically significant difference in the mean
cocoa percentage for low quality (M = 0.7242, SD = 0.0765) chocolate
bars and high quality (M = 0.711, SD = 0.0497) chocolate bars; t(1288) =
-4.0755, p \< 0.0001. Nonetheless, note that this difference in mean
chocolate darkness between the two quality groups was practically
trivial - only about 1.2%.

### Summary

We observed that chocolate experts tend to give somewhat lower ratings
as chocolate becomes more dark, although this tendency is very weak. We
also observed that the mean chocolate darkness difference between low
and high quality chocolate bars was trivial. Both observations suggest
that darker chocolate bars are not necessarily better chocolate bars.
There seems to be no clear relationship between chocolate darkness and
expert ratings.

### Limitations and future directions

There were a number of limitations with the current analysis.

For instance, note that most chocolate bars in our data set were already
relatively dark - around 70% cocoa concentration. To capture a more
comprehensive picture of the relationship between chocolate darkness and
ratings, we can gather additional chocolate bar samples that are much
less concentrated in future analyses.

Furthermore, we have not yet considered the scenarios in which the
relationship between chocolate darkness and ratings could be non-linear.
For instance, maybe experts prefer chocolate that is not too dark, or
not too light, but with just the right amount of cocoa.

In future analyses, we can explore these scenarios in the future by
computing [Kendall’s
tau](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kendall_rank_correlation_coefficient)
correlation coefficient instead, or by fitting a smooth line over our
scatter plot using
[LOESS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Local_regression) instead.

We also did not consider other factors that can influence the ratings of
the chocolate bars, such as the origin and quality of the cocoa beans,
as well as the company that produced the chocolate bars.

In future analyses, we can introduce additional variables such as cocoa
bean origin, cocoa bean type, as well as name of the chocolate company.
We can then use supervised machine learning algorithms, such as the
decision tree algorithm, to help us determine which are the strongest
predictors for high chocolate expert ratings.

### References

Tatman, R. (2017). Chocolate bar ratings. Retrieved from
<https://www.kaggle.com/rtatman/chocolate-bar-ratings/home>

Pemberton, C. (2018). Cacao versus cocoa: Are you eating real chocolate?
Retrieved from <https://blog.paleohacks.com/cacao-vs-cocoa/#>

Grace-Martin, K. (2018). Can Likert scale data ever be continuous?
Retrieved from
<https://www.theanalysisfactor.com/can-likert-scale-data-ever-be-continuous>
